			    <Installation>
			    Kazu Yamamoto
			     Oct 20, 1999

Emacs 19.28, 19.34 and 20.3 or later, Mule version 2.3 based on Emacs
19.28 or 19.34, and XEmacs 20.4 or later are supposed to be officially
supported. Mew may support beta versions of Emacs but Mew conforms the
spec of official release when available.

Support for Emacs 18, Mule 1 and XEmacs 19 and 20.3 is OBSOLETE,
sorry.

(0) Mew requires Perl 5.004_04 (note that 5.004 is buggy) or later and
IM. Install them in order before installing Mew. They can be found in
the followings:

	http://www.perl.com/CPAN/src/5.0/
	ftp://ftp.Mew.org/pub/Mew/

(1) Edit "Makefile" as you like.

(2) Type 'make'.

(3) Type 'make install'.

(4) Mew's info is formatted by Emacs 20.4. So, the info could not be
visible with other Emacsen like XEmacs. In this case, type 'make info'
to format the info.

(4.1) If you want to format the Japanese info, type 'make jinfo'.

(5) Type 'make install-info'. If you have the "install-info" command,
the the following line will be automatically added to the "dir" file.
Otherwise, add it by yourself.

---
* Mew: (mew.info).      Messaging in the Emacs World
---

(5.1) If you want the Japanese info, type 'make install-jinfo'. If you
have the "install-info" command, the the following line will be
automatically added to the "dir" file.  Otherwise, add it by yourself.

---
* Mew-J: (mew.jis.info).  Messaging in the Emacs World
---

(6) Copy the contents in the "etc" directory to anywhere, say
"/usr/local/lib/xemacs-20.4/etc/mew". 'make install-etc' would help.

(7) Add the following to "~/.emacs" or your site environment file.

	(autoload 'mew "mew" nil t)
	(autoload 'mew-send "mew" nil t)
	(setq mew-mail-domain-list '("your mail domain"))
	(setq mew-icon-directory "/usr/local/lib/xemacs-20.4/etc/mew")

Note that you need to set mew-icon-directory the directory in the
stage (6).

Optionally, add the following. This links Mew to other packages. For
example, Mew is used when you write reports on Emacs's bugs.

	(autoload 'mew-user-agent-compose "mew" nil t)
	(if (boundp 'mail-user-agent)
	    (setq mail-user-agent 'mew-user-agent))
	(if (fboundp 'define-mail-user-agent)
	    (define-mail-user-agent
	      'mew-user-agent
	      'mew-user-agent-compose
	      'mew-draft-send-letter
	      'mew-draft-kill
	      'mew-send-hook))

(8) Please check "mew.dot.emacs". Cut parts or the entire of the file
then add to "~/.emacs".

(9) On XEmacs, click the "Mail" tool button to start Mew. You should
copy "mew.dot.emacs" into your "~/.emacs".  If cute cats are displayed
and no error occurs, you succeeded. On text Emacs, type 'M-x mew' to
execute Mew. In this case, the old demo will start.

(10) For more information, see "00readme" contained sub-directories.

If you are Japanese, please give a look at "patches/00readme.jis".

Useful information may be found from the following web page:

	http://www.Mew.org/

--End of file
