This file documents a scheme whereby GNUS can become one's universal
news and mail interface.  Use of this scheme depends on the following:
	[a] News-reading using a local news spool; NNTP is not possible.
	[b] Availability of Berkeley symbolic links, to fool GNUS into
	    reading news in two places at once.
	[c] Support of .forward files for mail delivery, and in
	    particular piped aliases in .forward files.
	[d] GNUS 3.12.

Please read this entire description (several times) before putting any
of it to use, to be sure you understand what it is that you are
accomplishing along the way.

PROCEDURE:

[1] Build a newsgroup symlink tree.
	mkdir ~/Memos
	cd ~/Memos
	foreach i (/usr/spool/news/*)
		ln -s $i
	end
Now the variable nnspool-spool-directory can be set to the value
"~/Memos/" and things would work just like they always have.  But of
course we're nowhere near done yet.

[2] Decide on a news directory hierarchy to be placed in parallel with
normal news.  I use "personal.*" (for personal mail), "list.*" (for
mailing-list-related things), and "mailer-daemon" (so that bounces
from mailer daemons around the world don't clutter up your Real Mail
that you really want to read).  Make news-like directories for these.
	mkdir personal list mailer-daemon
	mkdir personal/general personal/special-person-1 personal/s-p-2
	mkdir list/general list/listname-1 list/listname-2 list/listname-3

[3] Initialize a pair of counter files for each newsgroup.  These will
be used for the max and min fields in the fake active file.  Also
create "KEY" files, used in mailbox delivery locking.
	foreach i (personal/* list/* mailer-daemon)
		echo 0 > $i/.first
		echo 0 > $i/.last
		touch $i/KEY
	end

[4] Copy the "make-active" script into your private bin directory.
(_Everyone_ has a private bin directory, right?)  Also copy the "pmd"
script (personal mail deliverer) to the same place, and edit it for
whatever personalizations you wish to give it.  I detect my usual
pseudonewsgroup pattern of personal.*, list.*, and mailer-daemon.
This script can be arbitrarily complex; have a blast.  BEWARE of the
fact that certain incarnations of csh are [cough] deficient and cannot
cope successfully with the long "mailer-daemon" regexp; case in point,
HP-UX 6.2's csh.
	cp make-active pmd ~/bin
	emacs ~/bin/pmd

[5] Edit the sample .emacs stuff into your own .emacs.  Note that a
number of items in there are peculiar to myself.  (I never said that
setting this up was going to be easy.  But neither is it exceptionally
painful, just somewhat tedious.)  Change function names and variable
values as appropriate to be useful to yourself.
	emacs ~/.emacs

[6] Apply the enclosed patch to nnspool.el, and recompile it.
	patch -d /usr/local/lib/emacs/lisp < nnspool-diff
This makes the functions and other stuff you've done to your .emacs
useful.  The patch causes nnspool to look for a user-defined function
which supplies the name of the active file to the nnspool functions.
The nnspool-personal-active-file function builds a new active file
every time called, and then returns the name of that file to the
calling function.  (People within Ohio State Computer Science can skip
this patch-&-recompile step, since it's already done.)

[7] SAVE COPIES OF YOUR .newsrc AND RELATED FILES.  One never knows
just how far one might screw oneself up, and it would be nice to be
able to recover from disaster, don't you agree?

[8] Install a .forward like the one supplied.  Make it look right for
your home directory and login name, of course.  Send yourself some
test mail, and check to see that it gets delivered appropriately in
your new pseudonewsgroup hierarchy.

[9] Fire up a fresh Emacs and invoke GNUS.  You will observe that
getting new news (at the stage "Reading active file...") takes a bit
longer, because nnspool-personal-active-file spawns make-active, which
is hacking up a fresh active file for you.  You will also observe that
you are magically subscribed to a whole slew of new "newsgroups" which
don't really exist.

[10] You know that weird guy that's been writing you mail every other
day for the last month?  The one you never want to hear from again?
Now you don't have to hear from him - ever.  The first time you see
mail from him (probably in personal.general), do this:
	M-k
	C-c C-k C-a
	C-c C-c
He's history as far as mail from him is concerned.

Bug reports, improvements, suggestions
to the scheme => karl@cis.ohio-state.edu.
