\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename edbibtex.info
@settitle edbibtex User's Manual
 
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header
 
@ifinfo
This file documents the @code{edbibtex} BibTeX Database system.
 
Copyright (C) 1993 Michael Burschik <burschik@@uni-bonn.de>
 
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
 
@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission
notice identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph
(this paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).
 
@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.
 
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end ifinfo
 
@titlepage
@title edbibtex
@subtitle The BibTeX Package for EDB
@subtitle Version 0.22
@subtitle December 1993
@author Michael Burschik
 
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright @copyright{} 1993 Michael Burschik
 
Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of
this manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice
are preserved on all copies.
 
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the entire
resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission
notice identical to this one.
 
Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation approved
by the Foundation.
@end titlepage
 
@node Top, , , (dir)
 
@code{edbibtex.el} is a package of functions which should prove useful
for maintaining BibTeX database files using EDB, Michael Ernst's
marvelous Emacs Database. @code{edbibtex.el} contains functions for
reading, writing, formatting and validating such files. You should also
have @file{BibTeX.dba}, an EDB auxiliary file for use with BibTeX style
bibliography files, and a set of sample formats.
 
I am indebted to Michael Ernst <mernst@@theory.lcs.mit.edu> and Thorsten
Ohl <ohl@@physics.harvard.edu> for the inspiration their code provided
and the information they supplied. I would also like to thank Alastair
Burt <burt@@dfki.uni-kl.de>, James Crotinger <jac@@moonshine.llnl.gov>
and Martin Maechler <maechler@@stat.math.ethz.ch> for bug reports.

Please send all bug reports, suggestions for improvement, threats and
praise (if any) to: Michael Burschik <burschik@@uni-bonn.de>.
 
 
@menu
* Copying::		How you can copy and share @code{edbibtex}.
* Caveats::		Where @code{edbibtex} will fail you.
* Features::		What @code{edbibtex} should do for you.
* Installation::	How to install @code{edbibtex}.
* Customization::	How to pinch and twiddle @code{edbibtex}.
* Concept Index::	Index of concepts.
@end menu
 
 
 
@node Copying, Caveats, Top, Top
@chapter Copying
@cindex Copying
@include gpl.texinfo
 
 
 
@node Caveats, Features, Copying, Top
@chapter Caveats
@cindex Caveats
@cindex What doesn't work
 
@menu
* Comments::		The fate of comments and folding information.
* Strings::		@code{@@string} commands and string concatenation.
@end menu
 
 
 
@node Comments, Strings,, Caveats
@section Comments
@cindex Comments
 
The BibTeX files I have seen so far all tended to have
comments and fancy delimiting lines or folding information
between the entries. I hope the relevant functions will
skip over this stuff unharmed, but they will discard all
such additional information. In other words:
 
@example
Anything which is not recognized as a
   BibTeX entry will be discarded.
@end example
 
My official position on comments is that they should be put
in some ignored BibTeX field, such as @samp{ABSTRACT} or
@samp{MY-COMMENT}. I might write functions to look for comments
in other places, but don't count on it. I would like to
support folding information at some time in the future.
 
 
 
@node Strings,, Comments, Caveats
@section Strings
 
BibTeX's @code{@@string} command is supported. If string
expansion (@pxref{String Expansion}.) is turned off
abbreviations will be displayed enclosed by @samp{#}
characters, which should be safe for enough for @TeX{} as
long as the catcodes have not been changed and your
abbreviations do not start with digits, which will confuse
@code{edbibtex}. The abbreviations will not, however, be
written to the database file that way. If abbreviations are
entered in database-edit-mode, they must also be enclosed
this way (@pxref{Defining Abbreviations}, for details and
examples). @refill
 
 
 
@node Features, Installation, Caveats, Top
@chapter Features
@cindex Features
 
@menu
* Defining Abbreviations::	BibTeX's @@string command.
* String Concatenation::	BibTeX's @samp{#} operator.
* Preambles::			BibTeX's @@preamble command.
* Validation::			Validating the database entries.
@end menu
 
 
 
@node Defining Abbreviations, String Concatenation,, Features
@section Defining Abbreviations
@cindex Defining Abbreviations
@findex BibTeX's @code{@@string} command
 
@code{edbibtex} is able to handle BibTeX's @code{@@string} command.
String declarations are considered to be a valid entry type and are
associated with a separate format file. @refill
 
If string expansion (@pxref{String Expansion}.) is turned off
abbreviations will be displayed enclosed by @samp{#} characters, which
should be safe for enough for @TeX{} as long as the catcodes have not
been changed and your abbreviations do not start with digits, which will
confuse @code{edbibtex}. The abbreviations will not, however, be written
to the database file that way. If abbreviations are entered in
database-edit-mode, they must also be enclosed this way. @refill
 
Thus, if your BibTeX database file contains the command
 
@example
@@string( AMS = "American Mathematical Society" )
@end example
 
then your database display buffer should look like this:
 
@example
PUBLISHER:   #AMS#
@end example
 
Make sure you always tag your abbreviations like that, even if string
expansion is turned on.
 
If string expansion is turned on, all abbreviations in the database file
will be expanded on being read from the file. However, you can still
enter abbreviations in database-edit-mode and these will still be
validated (@pxref{Validation}.).
 
 
 
@node String Concatenation, Preambles, Defining Abbreviations, Features
@section String Concatenation
@cindex String Concatenation
@findex BibTeX's concatenation operator
@findex @samp{#}
 
@code{edbibtex} supports BibTeX's string concatenation
feature. This means that you can write things like this:
 
@example
@@string( AMS = "American Mathematical Society" )
 
@@book@{lattices
 , ...
 , series = AMS # "Colloquium Publications"
 , ... @}
@end example
 
@code{edbibtex} will display this as:
 
@example
SERIES:   #AMS# Colloquium Publications
@end example
 
You can use any amount of concatenation.
 
 
 
@node Preambles, Validation, String Concatenation, Features
@section Preambles
@cindex Preambles
@findex BibTeX's @code{@@preamble} command
 
BibTeX's @@preamble feature, which allows you to define new
macros for your bibliography, is also supported by
@code{edbibtex}. @@preamble entries have their own display
format.
 
 
 
@node Validation,, Preambles, Features
@section Validation
@cindex Validation
@findex BibTeX-validate-entry
 
All entries are checked both for undefined abbreviations and for
violations of the BibTeX entry type requirements. This is done
automatically when the database file is read and whenever a record is
modified. It can also be done interactively with the function
@code{BibTeX-validate-entry}, which is bound to `C-c C-v' by default.
 
If you validate a string record, then @code{BibTeX-string-alist} is
updated. Your new abbreviation is now defined and will be expanded if
string expansion is turned on. You will no longer be warned about the
abbreviation being undefined.
 
 
 
@node Installation, Customization, Features, Top
@chapter Installation
@cindex Installation

The BibTeX package for EDB consists of the following files:

@enumerate
@item
The main code file: @file{edbibtex.el}

@item
An EDB auxiliary file: @file{bibtex.dba}

@item 
Format files: @file{article.fmt}, @file{bibtex.fmt}, @file{book.fmt},
@file{booklet.fmt}, @file{conference.fmt}, @file{inbook.fmt},
@file{incollection.fmt}, @file{inproceedings.fmt},
@file{manual.fmt}, @file{mastersthesis.fmt}, @file{misc.fmt},
@file{phdthesis.fmt}, @file{preamble.fmt}, @file{proceedings.fmt},
@file{string.fmt}, @file{techreport.fmt}, @file{unpublished.fmt} @refill

@item
Documentation: @file{edbibtex.texinfo}, @file{gpl.texinfo}

@item
Examples: @file{bibtex.bib}, @file{bibtex.dba}, @file{bibtex.fmt}
@end enumerate

Make a copy of @file{bibtex.dba}, change its name to fit the name of
your BibTeX database and put it somewhere it will be found by EDB. If,
for example, your database is called @file{PhD-Thesis.bibliography}, then
rename the copy of @file{BibTeX.dba} to @file{PhD-Thesis.dba}. @refill

Byte-compile @file{edbibtex.el} and put it somewhere in your load path.

@vindex db-format-file-path
Put the format files somewhere in EDB's @code{db-format-file-path}. It
is also a good idea to have a format file with the same base name as
your database, so that you will not be prompted for a format every time
you load it. This file should be a generic format file like
@file{bibtex.fmt}. Copy this format file and call it
@file{PhD-Thesis.fmt} or whatever. @refill

Reading and writing BibTeX database files is complicated and
time-consuming. If you are thinking of maintaining database files
containing more than two or three dozen entries, you should think about
keeping two versions: workday versions for use with EDB (in EDB's
internal layout) and Sunday versions for BibTeX to work with (in
BibTeX's file layout). You can control the on-disk representation of
your database files with @code{db-toggle-internal-file-layout}.
 
 
@node Customization, Concept Index, Installation, Top
@chapter Customization
@cindex Customization
 
The file @file{BibTeX.dba} is used to set a number of per-database
variables that modify the behaviour of @code{edbibtex}. Before you do
anything else, make sure that you have a copy of @file{bibtex.dba}
hidden away in some safe place. Make a copy of the file and rename it so
that it will fit your database file (e.g., @file{PhD-Thesis.dba}) and
customize that copy only.

A number of constants and variables that should be database independent
are defined in @code{edbibtex.el} itself.
 
@menu
* Entry Types::			Valid BibTeX entry types.
* Fields::			Valid BibTeX field names.
* Abbreviations::		Pre-defined abbreviations.
* String Expansion::		Expanding abbreviatons.
* Multiple Formats::		Using entry type dependent formats.
@end menu
 
 
 
@node Entry Types, Fields,, Customization
@section Entry Types
@cindex Entry Types
@vindex BibTeX-entry-type-alist
 
@code{BibTeX-entry-type-alist} is an association list containing all
valid BibTeX entry types and the format files associated with them.  You
shouldn't want to change the entry types, but you might want to give
other names to your format files.
 
Note that the list of valid entry types includes @code{@@string} and
@code{@@preamble} entries.
 
@code{BibTeX-entry-type-alist} is defined in @code{edbibtex.el}.
 
 
 
@node Fields, Abbreviations, Entry Types, Customization
@section Fields
@cindex Fields
@vindex BibTeX-field-alist
 
@code{BibTeX-field-alist} is an association list containing all standard
BibTeX entry fields (BibTeX version 0.99a) and a few additional fields
that happened to pop up in my own BibTeX database files or Thorsten
Ohl's example file. You might want to add a few of your own, depending
on what information you require and what style you are using.
 
At the moment, all external field names (i.e., all field names that will
be written to the database file) are string-equal to the uppercase
symbol name of the associated database field. I do not think you should
change that.
 
@code{BibTeX-field-alist} is defined in @code{edbibtex.el}.
 
 
 
@node Abbreviations, String Expansion, Fields, Customization
@section Abbreviations
@cindex Abbreviations
@vindex BibTeX-string-alist
 
@code{BibTeX-string-alist} is an association list containing a few
standard abbreviations and their expansions. You can add whatever you
like, or set it to @code{nil}.
 
This association list will be updated whenever a string entry is read
from the database file or a newly added string entry is validated
(@pxref{Validation}, for details).
 
@code{BibTeX-string-alist} is defined in @code{edbibtex.el}.
 
 
 
@node String Expansion, Multiple Formats, Abbreviations, Customization
@section String Expansion
@cindex String Expansion
@vindex BibTeX-expand-strings
 
If you set the per-database variable @code{BibTeX-expand-strings} to
something other than @code{nil}, then all abbreviations defined with BibTeX's
@code{@@string} feature will be expanded. I'm not sure this is useful
for anything.
 
 
 
@node Multiple Formats,, String Expansion, Customization
@section Multiple Formats
@cindex Multiple Formats
@findex db-alternate-format
@findex BibTeX-set-format
@vindex BibTeX-multiple-format
@vindex BibTeX-use-default-format
 
If the per-database variable @code{BibTeX-multiple-format} is set to
@code{nil}, then only a generic format will be used to display records.  If
@code{BibTeX-multiple-format} was set from the auxiliary file, then this
format will be the one defined as @code{GENERIC}; otherwise it will be the
format of the record on display when the variable was set. In any case,
however, you can change the format with @code{db-alternate-format}.
 
If @code{BibTeX-multiple-format} is set to anything other than @code{nil},
@code{db-alternate-format} will have no effect at all; the format of an
entry will depend on the format file associated with its entry type.
 
If @code{BibTeX-use-default-format} is set to something other than
@code{nil}, then the format of a newly added entry (i.e., an entry without a
valid entry type) will be the default format (i.e., the format of the
entry currently on display). You can change this with
@code{BibTeX-set-format}. If @code{BibTeX-use-default-format} is set to
@code{nil}, you will be prompted for an appropriate format.
 
 
 
@page
 
@node Concept Index,, Customization, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index
@printindex cp
 
 
@contents
@bye
