$Id: README,v 1.5 1993/04/15 21:36:31 flee Exp $

* Introduction.

This kit contains a drop-in replacement for nntp.el in GNUS 3.14.1.
It will probably work with other versions, but not GNUS2.

This replacement is marginally faster at parsing nntp output in
general, but the major improvement is it will use the nntp XOVER
extension if available.  With XOVER, entering a newsgroup is
substantially faster: reading and parsing 600 headers takes about 3s
on a Sun-4/20 (but threading is still quite slow).

Without XOVER, this kit may not be worth it.  But it should be easy to
try it, and easy to back out from.


* Installing.

1. Copy chat.el and nntp.el to your elisp directory.  nntp.el is a
direct replacement for the nntp.el that comes with GNUS.  chat.el is
an auxiliary module needed by nntp.el.

2. Byte-compile chat.el and nntp.el, in that order.  It's best if you
use Jamie Zawinski's byte compiler (available from the elisp archive
at archive.cis.ohio-state.edu), which is better than the one
distributed with Emacs 18.  If you don't have Zawinski's byte
compiler, you can uudecode chat.elc.uu and nntp.elc.uu instead.


* XOVER support.

There are two types of news server that support XOVER:

1. INN version 1.3 supports an overview database and XOVER directly.

2. C News/nntpd.  C News needs to be augmented with Geoff Collyer's
nov.dist.tar.Z (available from world.std.com).  nntpd needs to be
augmented with the XOVER patch (included in this distribution), which
should become "standard" with the next release of nntpd.


* About Xrefs.

GNUS relies on the Xref: header to mark crossposted articles
correctly.  By default, the overview database does not include Xref:
information.

If you do not have Xref: data, this nntp.el will try to adapt by
grabbing the Xref: header when you retrieve an article.  This works
much of the time, but isn't perfect.  In particular, kill files and
catch-up will not mark crossposted articles correctly.

A better idea is to include Xref: data in the overview database.  For
C news/nov.dist, you need to uncomment the line in mkov.c that says:
	/* putextfld("xref", hdrp->h_xref); */
and then rebuild mkov.

For INN, you just need to uncomment the line in /news/lib/overview.fmt
that says:
	#Xref:full


* Feedback.

Send bugs, comments to:
	Felix Lee <flee@cs.psu.edu>
