		Documentation for tek-epoch-stuff1.1.0
		======================================

This release is a bundle of emacs-lisp packages for epoch,
mainly related to highlighting. A couple of packages may be of
interest to non-epoch users, namely the manual browser and the
syntax-decode stuff. Read on for details.

Note: much of this code is based on code originally written by others.
Though I won't mention them here, their names are preserved in the
source files and I'd like to thank them for their efforts.

For instructions on how to install & use the packages in this release,
see the file INSTALL. The remainder of this file is documentation on
the packages themselves.


In Brief
========

Here is a list of the packages included, and a brief overview of their
features:

* Enhanced manual browser: runs in background; supports multiple man
buffers; man buffers are in a special mode with local key & mouse
bindings; sections of man page are highlighted under epoch. I know
there are a lot of manual browsers out there, but I think this one is
pretty neat - check it out and tell me what you think.

* Comment highlighting in source code buffers: comment structure is
determined from the current syntax table; highlighting updated on
find-file and save-buffer. Several other people have released comment
highlighting packages, but this is the most complete & elegant
solution I've seen. Because the comment structure is determined in a
generic manner it will work with any editing mode that has a valid
syntax table. I've tried to optimise it too, and it's reasonably quick.

* Interface to Dave Gillespies info browser (included): provides epoch
mouse bindings and highlighting. Once again, this is the most complete
implementation I've seen, and is reasonably quick (although
suggestions for improving the speed of any of these packages are very
welcome).

* Header highlighting in news articles displayed under GNUS.
Highlights "From:" and "Subject:" fields in news articles.

* Header highlighting in mail messages displayed under VM. Highlights
"From:" and "Subject:" fields in mail messages.

* Header highlighting in mail messages displayed under the mh-e
mailreader. Highlights "From:" and "Subject:" fields in mail messages.

* Customisation of motion highlighting style. Allows you to change the
style used to highlight mouse drag regions by setting X resources.

* The highlighting styles used in all of the above packages are
initialised by a package which looks up the X resource database to
find the appropriate option settings. All of the packages have
sensible defaults though, so you can get started without settting up
any X resources at all: on a color display different colors are used
for highlighting; on a monochrome display an italic or bold font, the
same height and width as the minibuffer font, is used for
highlighting.  See the file tek-style-utils.el for details of how to
customise your highlighting styles.


Changes from 1.0.0
==================

* Merged in support for the epoch 4.0 button handling (i.e. use of
styles directly instead of via attributes). A variable is used to
select between the two behaviours - see INSTALL for details.

* Added highlighting under mh-e. Thanks to Mike Burgett
<burgett@adobe.com> for this.


Manifest
========

COPYING
INSTALL
LCD-entry
README
epoch-running.el
get-font.patch
maclib-toolbox.el
mh-e.el
mh-e.patch
syntax-decode.el
tek-gnus-hilite-setup.el
tek-gnus-hilite.el
tek-info-buttons.el
tek-info-setup.el
tek-info.el
tek-man-setup.el
tek-man.el
tek-mh-e-hilite-setup.el
tek-mh-e-hilite.el
tek-motion-setup.el
tek-src-hilite-setup.el
tek-src-hilite.el
tek-style-utils.el
tek-vm-hilite-setup.el
tek-vm-hilite.el


Other Details
=============

The source code highlighting package uses a package I wrote called
syntax-decode, which extracts the comment structure for the current
major mode from the current syntax table. This package could easily be
modified to extract other data from the syntax table as well, so let
me know if you have a use for it.

This package also stores the data thus extracted in an alist, to avoid
decoding the same syntax table more than once. This makes it a little
faster in modes which it's seen before.


Bugs
====

There are probably a few, so feel free to send me (Ken Wood) a bug
report at kwood@austek.oz.au . I will try and look at it, but I won't
promise anything.

In particular, the manual browser could probably do with a bit more
work. Several people have sent me suggestions, but I haven't had a
chance to include them yet. Feel free to improve upon it if you choose
- please send me a copy of your mods in this case.


			   === The End ===
