System Requirements
===================

Mailcrypt is designed for use with FSF Emacs 19.29 (and higher) or
XEmacs 19.13 (and higher).  Mailcrypt absolutely requires at least FSF
Emacs 19.28 or XEmacs 19.12.  With some effort, earlier versions might
be made to work, but this is not supported.

Basic Installation
==================

The simplest way to build and install Mailcrypt is:

  1. `cd' to the Mailcrypt source directory and type `./configure' to
     configure Mailcrypt for your system.

  2. Type `make' to build the byte-compiled Lisp files.

  3. Type `make install' to install the Mailcrypt Lisp files and Info
     manual.

Load Path
=========

If you use VM, RMAIL, MH-E, or GNUS and the respective package is not
in your default load-path, Mailcrypt may fail to byte compile
correctly.  (Emacs does not load your `.emacs' file when run in batch
mode.)  If this applies to you, edit Mailcrypt's `load-path.hack' file
to add the appropriate directory to the load-path during byte
compilation.

Installation Names
==================

By default, `make install' will install the package's files in
`/usr/local/info' and `/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp'.  You can
specify an installation prefix other than `/usr/local' by giving
`configure' the option `--prefix=PATH'.

If your installed copy of Emacs 19 is named something other than
`emacs' or `xemacs', you will need to tell `make' where to find it so
that it can correctly byte-compile the Mailcrypt sources.

For example, to use XEmacs you might do:

	./configure
	make EMACS=xemacs
	make install

Also, the `--prefix=PATH' option to `configure' may not be general
enough to set the paths you want.  If not, you can pass variables to
the `make' command to control the installation.

For example, to put the Lisp files in `$HOME/elisp' and the Info file
in `$HOME/info', you would type:

	./configure
	make
	make lispdir=$HOME/elisp infodir=$HOME/info install

FSF Emacs 19.28
===============

Mailcrypt's installation procedure assumes the directory structure
used by FSF Emacs 19.29 (e.g., `/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp').
If you are using 19.28, you will need to use an installation command
like the following:

	make datadir=/usr/local/lib install

This is the *only* special action you need to install Mailcrypt for
FSF Emacs 19.28.

XEmacs 19.12
============

Mailcrypt requires the `easymenu' package, which is bundled with FSF
Emacs 19.28 (and higher) and with XEmacs 19.13 (and higher).  If you
are using XEmacs 19.12, you will need to obtain a copy of this package
and install it somewhere in your load-path.  The easiest way is to go
to

	ftp://archive.cis.ohio-state.edu/pub/gnu/emacs/elisp-archive/

and obtain the latest version of `auc-menu.el'.  Install it in your
load path under the name `easymenu.el'.  (Don't ask.)
