		Documentation for tek-highlight-2.0.0
		=====================================

This release is a bundle of emacs-lisp packages for epoch,
all related to highlighting. A couple of packages may be of
interest to non-epoch users, namely the syntax-decode stuff.
Read on for details.

Note: much of this code is based on code originally written by others.
Though I won't mention them here, their names are preserved in the
source files and I'd like to thank them for their efforts.

For instructions on how to install & use the packages in this release,
see the file INSTALL. The remainder of this file is documentation on
the packages themselves.


In Brief
========

Here is a list of the packages included, and a brief overview of their
features:

* Comment highlighting in source code buffers: comment structure is
determined from the current syntax table; highlighting updated on
find-file and save-buffer. Several other people have released comment
highlighting packages, but this is the most complete & elegant
solution I've seen. Because the comment structure is determined in a
generic manner it will work with any editing mode that has a valid
syntax table. I've tried to optimise it too, and it's reasonably quick.

* Highlighting in Dave Gillespies info browser: provides epoch
highlighting for the info browser. Once again, this is the most complete
implementation I've seen, and is reasonably quick (although
suggestions for improving the speed of any of these packages are very
welcome).

* File highlighting in dired buffers. Highlights files in dired
buffers according to customizable criteria.

* Header highlighting in news articles displayed under GNUS.
Highlights "From:" and "Subject:" fields in news articles.

* Header highlighting in mail messages displayed under VM. Highlights
"From:" and "Subject:" fields in mail messages.

* Header highlighting in mail messages displayed under the mh-e
mailreader. Highlights "From:" and "Subject:" fields in mail messages.

* Customisation of motion highlighting style. Allows you to change the
style used to highlight mouse drag regions by setting X resources.

* The highlighting styles used in all of the above packages are
initialised by a package which looks up the X resource database to
find the appropriate option settings. All of the packages have
sensible defaults though, so you can get started without settting up
any X resources at all: on a color display different colors are used
for highlighting; on a monochrome display an italic or bold font, the
same height and width as the minibuffer font, is used for
highlighting.  See the file tek-style-utils.el for details of how to
customise your highlighting styles.


Changes from tek-epoch-stuff 1.1.0
==================================

This package started out as tek-epoch-stuff, maintained by Ken Wood
(kwood@austek.oz.au).  Unfortunately, the company that both Ken and I
worked for went out of business.  Ken no longer has access to the
Internet.

As Ken can no longer support the package, I have decided to re-release
just the highlighting portion under a new name "tek-highlight".  I
intend to re-release the mouse support under the name "tek-mouse" at a
later date.

The main changes are:

* Automated the support for the epoch 4.0 button handling (i.e. use of
styles directly instead of via attributes).

* Added highlighting support for dired.

* Removed the actual info browser - you should get the latest version
from the elisp archive (info-dg: ~/modes/info.el.Z).  This package
just supplies a highlighting interface to the info browser.  This
package has been tested with version 1.04 of info-dg.

* Removed the manual browser support.  I haven't been able to track
down the location of the original package.  I would rather support a
highlighting interface to a manual browser than an actual manual
browser itself.

* Removed all mouse support - to be put in a separate package called
"tek-mouse".

* Corrected the spelling of "highlight" throughout the package.

Manifest
========

COPYING
INSTALL
LCD-entry
README
get-font.patch
mh-e.patch
syntax-decode.el
tek-dired-highlight-setup.el
tek-dired-highlight.el
tek-gnus-highlight-setup.el
tek-gnus-highlight.el
tek-info-highlight-setup.el
tek-info-highlight.el
tek-mh-e-highlight-setup.el
tek-mh-e-highlight.el
tek-motion-highlight-setup.el
tek-src-highlight-setup.el
tek-src-highlight.el
tek-style-utils.el
tek-vm-highlight-setup.el
tek-vm-highlight.el
unique-hooks.el


Other Details
=============

The source code highlighting package uses a package written by Ken
Wood called syntax-decode, which extracts the comment structure for
the current major mode from the current syntax table. This package
could easily be modified to extract other data from the syntax table
as well, so let me know if you have a use for it.

This package also stores the data thus extracted in an alist, to avoid
decoding the same syntax table more than once. This makes it a little
faster in modes which it's seen before.


Bugs
====

There are probably a few, so feel free to send me (Rod Whitby) a bug
report at rwhitby@research.canon.oz.au.  I will try and look at it,
but I won't promise anything.

			   === The End ===
