		    GNU Emacs Lisp Archive README

Last Update: November, 25 1996

General Information

    This archive contains various pieces and packages of Emacs Lisp
code.  Emacs Lisp is the language used to extend the GNU Emacs editor
published by the Free Software Foundation.  Although much Emacs Lisp
code is included in the GNU Emacs distribution, many people have
written packages to interface with other systems, to better support
editing the programming language they use, to add new features, or to
change Emacs' default behavior.  Most of the contents of this archive
have been written by individuals and distributed publicly over the
Internet through the info-emacs or info-gnu-emacs mailing lists or the
comp.emacs, gnu.emacs, gnu.emacs.sources newsgroups.

Before the GNU Emacs Lisp Archive existed, there was the Lisp Code
Directory, or LCD.  The LCD is a flat-file database of Emacs Lisp
code.  Unlike the Archive, the Directory *does* include references to
the Emacs Lisp distributed with GNU Emacs.  An elisp support package
called lispdir has been provided to interface with the LCD.  With this
package installed, it's a simple matter to determine if a package is
available to meet a particular need.

The Lisp Code Directory datafile is in LCD-datafile.Z.  Documentation
for the Lisp Code Directory is in lispdir.doc.Z.

Archive Format

All of the files in the archive are compressed.

Most files are Emacs Lisp code and their names end in ".el.Z".

For mode information on submitting entries to the archive read the
file GUIDELINES.Z.

The archives are maintained by Dave Brennan (brennan@gnu.ai.mit.edu).
Send questions, comments, and submissions to them.

			   NO WARRANTY

  BECAUSE THE GNU EMACS LISP ARCHIVE IS PROVIDED FREE OF CHARGE, WE
PROVIDE ABSOLUTELY NO WARRANTY, TO THE EXTENT PERMITTED BY APPLICABLE
STATE LAW.  EXCEPT WHEN OTHERWISE STATED IN WRITING, OHIO STATE
UNIVERSITY, DAVID E. SILL, DAVID J. BRENNAN, AND/OR OTHER PARTIES
PROVIDE GNU EMACS LISP ARCHIVE CODE "AS IS" WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE
IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.  THE ENTIRE RISK AS TO THE QUALITY AND PERFORMANCE OF THE
CODE IS WITH YOU.  SHOULD GNU EMACS LISP ARCHIVE CODE PROVE DEFECTIVE,
YOU ASSUME THE COST OF ALL NECESSARY SERVICING, REPAIR OR CORRECTION.

 IN NO EVENT UNLESS REQUIRED BY APPLICABLE LAW WILL OHIO STATE
UNIVERSITY, DAVID E. SILL, DAVID J. BRENNAN, AND/OR ANY OTHER PARTY
WHO MAY MODIFY AND REDISTRIBUTE GNU EMACS LISP ARCHIVE CODE, BE LIABLE
TO YOU FOR DAMAGES, INCLUDING ANY LOST PROFITS, LOST MONIES, OR OTHER
SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES ARISING OUT OF THE USE OR
INABILITY TO USE (INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO LOSS OF DATA OR DATA
BEING RENDERED INACCURATE OR LOSSES SUSTAINED BY THIRD PARTIES OR A
FAILURE OF THE CODE TO OPERATE WITH CODE NOT DISTRIBUTED BY THE EMACS
LISP ARCHIVE) THE CODE, EVEN IF YOU HAVE BEEN ADVISED OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES, OR FOR ANY CLAIM BY ANY OTHER PARTY.
