Installation of AUC TeX
***********************

Compiling
=========

The following describes how to install AUC TeX under Unix.  You may
also be able to do use these instructions under some other operating
systems, if you have already installed the proper GNU tools, such as
`make'.

   To install AUC TeX for an entire site (which may just be your own
personal Linux box), issue the following two commands as root:

     make
     make lispdir=/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp install

   except that instead of /usr/local/... you should use the location of
your sites emacs installation.  AUC TeX will then be installed in a
subdirectory named `auctex' of the `site-lisp' directory, and the file
`tex-site.el' will be stored directly in the `site-lisp'.  You can now
tell your users to enable AUC TeX by adding

     (require 'tex-site)

   to their `.emacs' file.

   If you use xemacs instead, or if your emacs binary is named something
else than `emacs', specify this by using the commands

     make EMACS=xemacs
     make lispdir=/usr/local/share/emacs/site-lisp install

   to install.

   If you want to install AUC TeX in your personal account, you should
chose a directory for all your emacs add-ons, for example an `elisp'
subdirectory in your home directory.  You can then install AUC TeX with
the commands

     make
     make lispdir=$HOME/elisp install

   You will then need to add the following lines to your `.emacs' file:

     (setq load-path (cons "~/elisp" load-path))
     (require 'tex-site)

Customizing
===========

   Next, you should edit the file `tex-site.el' to fit your local site.
You do this by looking at the customization section in the beginning
of `tex.el' and copy the definitions that are wrong for your site to
`tex-site.el'.  Do *not* edit `tex.el' directly, or you will have to do
all the work over again when you upgrade AUC TeX.  AUC TeX will not
overwrite your old `tex-site.el' file next time you install, so you
will be able to keep all your customizations.

   There are two variables with a special significance.

 - User Option: TeX-lisp-directory
     The directory where you want to install the AUC TeX lisp files.

   This variable is set automatically by the `make install' command.
If you don't issue a `make install', for example if you don't want to
install AUC TeX in a different place, you will have to set this
variable manually to the location of the compiled files.

 - User Option: TeX-macro-global
     Directories containing the site's TeX style files.

   Normally, AUC TeX will only allow you to complete a short list of
built-in macros and environments and on the macros you define yourself.
If you issue the `M-x TeX-auto-generate-global' command after loading
AUC TeX, you will be able to complete on all macros available in the
standard style files used by your document.  To do this, you must set
this variable to a list of directories where the standard style files
are located.  The directories will be searched recursively, so there is
no reason to list subsirectories explicitly.

   You probably also need to change `TeX-command-list' to make sure
that the commands used for starting TeX, printing, etc. work on your
system.  Copy the definition from `tex.el' to `tex-site.el' and edit
the command names appropriately.

   Finally, copy and edit `TeX-printer-list' to contain the printers
available at your site.

   To extract information from your sites TeX macros, type `M-x
TeX-auto-generate-global' in your emacs.  This will only work if you
have set `TeX-macro-global' correctly in `tex-site.el'.

Contributed files
=================

   There are several files that are not part of AUC TeX proper, but
included in the distribution in case they are useful.

`hilit-LaTeX.el'
     Better highlighting for the obsolete `hilit19' package.

`font-latex.el'
     Better highlighting for the FONT-LOCK package.

`bib-cite.el'
     Better support for bibliographies and much more.

`tex-jp.el'
     Support for Japanese.

`func-doc.el'
     Support for context sensitive online help for various languages.

   Read the comments in the start of each file for more information
about how to install, what they do, and who wrote and maintains them.

