Introduction to AUC TeX
***********************

This section of the AUC TeX manual gives a brief overview of what AUC
TeX is, and the section is also available as a `README' file.  It is
*not* an attempt to document AUC TeX.  Real documentation for AUC TeX
is available in the rest of the manual, which you can find in the `doc'
directory.

   Read the `INSTALLATION' file for information about how to install
AUC TeX.  It is identical to the Installation chapter in the AUC TeX
manual.

   If you are upgrading from the previous version of AUC TeX, the
latest changes can be found in the `CHANGES' file.  If you are
upgrading from an older version, read the History chapter in the AUC
TeX manual.

   AUC TeX is a comprehensive customizable integrated environment for
writing input files for LaTeX using GNU Emacs.

   AUC TeX lets you run TeX/LaTeX and other LaTeX-related tools, such
as a output filters or post processor from inside Emacs.  Especially
`running LaTeX' is interesting, as AUC TeX lets you browse through the
errors TeX reported, while it moves the cursor directly to the reported
error, and displays some documentation for that particular error.  This
will even work when the document is spread over several files.

   AUC TeX automatically indents your `LaTeX-source', not only as you
write it -- you can also let it indent and format an entire document.
It has a special outline feature, which can greatly help you `getting an
overview' of a document.

   Apart from these special features, AUC TeX provides a large range of
handy Emacs macros, which in several different ways can help you write
your LaTeX documents fast and painlessly.

   All features of AUC TeX are documented using the GNU Emacs online
documentation system.  That is, documentation for any command is just a
key click away!

   AUC TeX is written entirely in Emacs-Lisp, and hence you can easily
add new features for your own needs.  It was not made as part of any
particular employment or project (apart from the AUC TeX project
itself).  AUC TeX is distributed under the `GNU Emacs General Public
License' and may therefore almost freely be copied and redistributed.

   The next sections are a short introduction to some `actual' features.
For further information, refer to the built-in online documentation of
AUC TeX.

Indentation and formatting
==========================

   AUC TeX may automatically indent your document as you write it. By
pressing lfd instead of ret at the end of a line, the current line is
indented by two spaces according to the current environment level, and
the cursor is moved down one line.  By pressing tab, the current line
is indented, and the cursor stays where it is.  The well-known Emacs
feature `format-paragraph' (`M-q') is reimplemented especially for AUC
TeX to follow the indentation.  A special command `LaTeX-fill-buffer'
lets you indent an entire document like the well-known C utility indent
(this time, only according to the LaTeX structure :-).

Completion
==========

   By studying your `\documentclass' command (in the top of your
document), and consulting a precompiled list of (La)TeX symbols from a
large number of TeX and LaTeX files, AUC TeX is aware of the LaTeX
commands you should be able to use in this particular document.  This
`knowledge' of AUC TeX is used for two purposes.

  1. To make you able to `complete' partly written LaTeX commands. You
     may e.g. write `\renew' and press `M-tab' (`TeX-complete-symbol'),
     and then AUC TeX will complete the word `\renewcommand' for you.
     In case of ambiguity it will display a list of possible
     completions.

  2. To aid you inserting environments, that is \begin - \end pairs.
     This is done by pressing C-c C-e (LaTeX-environment), and you will
     be prompted for which `environment' to insert.

Editing your document
=====================

   A number of more or less intelligent keyboard macros have been
defined to aid you editing your document.  The most important are
listed below.

`LaTeX-environment'
     (`C-c C-e') Insert a `\begin{}' -- `\end{}' pair as described
     above.

`LaTeX-section'
     (`C-c C-s') Insert one of `\chapter', `\section', etc.

`TeX-font'
     (`C-c C-f C-r', `C-c C-f C-i', `C-c C-f C-b') Insert one of
     `\textrm{ }'), `\textit{ \/}' `\textbf{ }' etc.

   A number of additional functions are available.  But it would be far
too much to write about here.  Refer to the rest of the AUC TeX
documentation for further information.

Running LaTeX
=============

   When invoking one of the commands `TeX-command-master' (`C-c C-c')
or `TeX-command-region' (`C-c C-r') LaTeX is run on either the entire
current document or a given region of it.  The Emacs view is split in
two, and the output of TeX is printed in the second half of the screen,
as you may simultaneously continue editing your document.  In case TeX
find any errors when processing your input you can call the function
`TeX-next-error' (`C-c `') which will move the cursor to the first
given error, and display a short explanatory text along with the
message TeX gave.  This procedure may be repeated until all errors have
been displayed.  By pressing `C-c C-w' (`TeX-toggle-debug-boxes') you
can toggle whether the browser also should notify over-full/under-full
boxes or not.

   Once you've successfully formatted your document, you may preview or
print it by invoking `TeX-command-master' again.

Outlines
========

   Along with AUC TeX comes support for outline mode for Emacs, which
lets you browse the sectioning structure of your document, while you
will still be able to use the full power of the rest of the AUC TeX
functionality.

Availability
============

   The most recent version is always available by ftp at

                   `ftp://ftp.iesd.auc.dk/pub/emacs-lisp/auctex.tar.gz'

   In case you don't have access anonymous ftp, you can get it by email
requests to `<ftpmail@decwrl.dec.com>'.

   WWW users may want to check out the AUC TeX page at

                               `http://www.iesd.auc.dk/~amanda/auctex/'

Contacts
========

   There has been established a mailing list for help, bug reports,
feature requests and general discussion about AUC TeX.  You're very
welcome to join.  Traffic average at an article by day, but they come
in bursts.  If you are only interested in information on updates, you
could refer to the newsgroups `comp.text.tex' and `gnu.emacs.sources'.

   If you want to contact the AUC TeX mailing list, send mail to
`<auc-tex-request@iesd.auc.dk>' in order to join.  Articles should be
sent to `<auc-tex@iesd.auc.dk>'.

   To contact the current maintainers of AUC TeX directly, email
`<auc-tex_mgr@iesd.auc.dk>'.

             AUC TeX development
             c/o Kresten Krab Thorup
     
             Mathematics and Computer Science
             University of Aalborg
             DK 9000 Aalborg
             Denmark

